Revamp CNI doc. (#10090)
istio/istio.io: content/en/docs/setup/additional-setup/cni/index.md

aliases:
    - /docs/setup/kubernetes/install/cni
    - /docs/setup/kubernetes/additional-setup/cni
keywords: [cni]
owner: istio/wg-networking-maintainers
test: yes
---

Follow this guide to install, configure, and use an Istio mesh using the Istio Container Network Interface
([CNI](https://github.com/containernetworking/cni#cni---the-container-network-interface))
plugin.

> By default Istio injects an init container, `istio-init`, in pods deployed in

Reviewer: this is inconsistent throughout?  I think it's in quotes to bypass spellchecking.

Author: Updated all presence of `initContainer` to init container.

networking functionality but without requiring Istio users to enable elevated
Kubernetes RBAC permissions.

> The Istio CNI plugin identifies Istio user application pods with Istio sidecars requiring traffic redirection and
> performs the Istio mesh pod traffic redirection in the Kubernetes pod lifecycle's network

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Istio CNI plugin identifies user application pods with sidecars requiring traffic redirection and
sets this up in the Kubernetes pod lifecycle's network
```

setup phase, thereby removing the [requirement for the `NET_ADMIN` and `NET_RAW` capabilities](/docs/ops/deployment/requirements/)
for users deploying pods into the Istio mesh.  The Istio CNI plugin
replaces the functionality provided by the `istio-init` container.

{{< tip >}}

> Note: The Istio CNI plugin operates as a chained CNI plugin, and it needs to be used with other main CNI plugins,
> such as [PTP](https://www.cni.dev/plugins/current/main/ptp/), and [Calico](https://docs.projectcalico.org).
> See [compatibility with other CNI plugins](#compatibility-with-other-cni-plugins) for details.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note: The Istio CNI plugin operates as a chained CNI plugin, and it needs to be used with another CNI plugin,
such as [PTP](https://www.cni.dev/plugins/current/main/ptp/) or [Calico](https://docs.projectcalico.org).
See [compatibility with other CNI plugins](#compatibility-with-other-cni-plugins) for details.
```

needs to?  is designed to?

{{< /tip >}}

## Install CNI

### Prerequisites

1. Install Kubernetes with the container runtime supporting CNI and `kubelet` configured
  with the main [CNI](https://github.com/containernetworking/cni) plugin enabled via `--network-plugin=cni`.
    * AWS EKS, Azure AKS, and IBM Cloud IKS clusters have this capability.

>     * Google Cloud GKE clusters has CNI enabled when any of the following features is enabled:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    * Google Cloud GKE clusters have CNI enabled when any of the following features are enabled:
```

       [network policy](https://cloud.google.com/kubernetes-engine/docs/how-to/network-policy),
       [intranode visibility](https://cloud.google.com/kubernetes-engine/docs/how-to/intranode-visibility),
       [workload identity](https://cloud.google.com/kubernetes-engine/docs/how-to/workload-identity),
       [pod security policy](https://cloud.google.com/kubernetes-engine/docs/how-to/pod-security-policies#overview),
       or [dataplane v2](https://cloud.google.com/kubernetes-engine/docs/concepts/dataplane-v2).
    * OpenShift has CNI enabled by default.

1. Install Kubernetes with the [ServiceAccount admission controller](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/access-authn-authz/admission-controllers/#serviceaccount) enabled.
    * The Kubernetes documentation highly recommends this for all Kubernetes installations
      where `ServiceAccounts` are utilized.

### Install Istio with CNI plugin

In most environments, a basic Istio cluster with CNI enabled can be installed using the following configuration:

{{< text yaml >}}
apiVersion: install.istio.io/v1alpha1
kind: IstioOperator
spec:
  components:
    cni:
      enabled: true
{{< /text >}}

> This will deploy an `istio-cni-node` DaemonSet into the cluster, which installs Istio CNI plugin binary to each node and set up needed configuration for the plugin.
> The `istio-cni-node` DaemonSet runs with [`system-node-critical`](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/administer-cluster/guaranteed-scheduling-critical-addon-pods/) `PriorityClass`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This will deploy an `istio-cni-node` DaemonSet into the cluster, which installs the Istio CNI plugin binary to each node and sets up the necessary configuration for the plugin.
The CNI DaemonSet runs with [`system-node-critical`](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/administer-cluster/guaranteed-scheduling-critical-addon-pods/) `PriorityClass`.
```

{{< image width="60%" link="./cni.svg" caption="Istio CNI" >}}

There are several commonly used install options:

* `components.cni.namespace=kube-system` configures the namespace to install the CNI DaemonSet.

> * `values.cni.cniBinDir` and `values.cni.cniConfDir` configure the directory paths to install plugin binary and create plugin configuration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `values.cni.cniBinDir` and `values.cni.cniConfDir` configure the directory paths to install the plugin binary and create plugin configuration.
```

>   `values.cni.cniConfFileName` configures the name of plugin configuration file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  `values.cni.cniConfFileName` configures the name of the plugin configuration file.
```

> * `values.cni.chained` controls whether to configure the Istio CNI plugin as a chained CNI plugin.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `values.cni.chained` controls whether to configure the plugin as a chained CNI plugin.
```

{{< tip >}}

> Note there is a time gap between a node becomes schedulable and Istio CNI plugin becomes ready on that node.
> If an application pod starts up during that time gap, it is possible that the traffic redirection is not properly set up and traffic can bypass Istio sidecar.
> This race condition is mitigated by a `detect and repair` method.
> Please take a look at [race condition & mitigation](#race-condition-mitigation) section to understand the implication of this mitigation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There is a time gap between a node becomes schedulable and the Istio CNI plugin becomes ready on that node.
If an application pod starts up during this time, it is possible that traffic redirection is not properly set up and traffic would be able to bypass the Istio sidecar.
This race condition is mitigated by a "detect and repair" method.
Please take a look at [race condition & mitigation](#race-condition-mitigation) section to understand the implication of this mitigation.
```

{{< /tip >}}

### Hosted Kubernetes settings

> The `istio-cni` plugin is expected to work with any hosted Kubernetes leveraging CNI plugins.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `istio-cni` plugin is expected to work with any hosted Kubernetes version using CNI plugins.
```

networking functionality but without requiring Istio users to enable elevated
Kubernetes RBAC permissions.

The Istio CNI plugin identifies Istio user application pods with Istio sidecars requiring traffic redirection and
performs the Istio mesh pod traffic redirection in the Kubernetes pod lifecycle's network
setup phase, thereby removing the [requirement for the `NET_ADMIN` and `NET_RAW` capabilities](/docs/ops/deployment/requirements/)
for users deploying pods into the Istio mesh.  The Istio CNI plugin

> replaces the functionality provided by the `istio-init` container.

Reviewer 2: Could maybe use a `{{note}}` that this is a cni *plugin* - it is not a full on CNI, and doesn't replace those.

Author: We had a section about Istio CNI needs to work with other main plugins. I added a tip here to make it more obvious and point to that section.

## Install CNI

### Prerequisites

1. Install Kubernetes with the container runtime supporting CNI and `kubelet` configured
  with the main [CNI](https://github.com/containernetworking/cni) plugin enabled via `--network-plugin=cni`.
    * AWS EKS, Azure AKS, and IBM Cloud IKS clusters have this capability.
    * Google Cloud GKE clusters has CNI enabled when any of the following features is enabled:
       [network policy](https://cloud.google.com/kubernetes-engine/docs/how-to/network-policy),
       [intranode visibility](https://cloud.google.com/kubernetes-engine/docs/how-to/intranode-visibility),
       [workload identity](https://cloud.google.com/kubernetes-engine/docs/how-to/workload-identity),
       [pod security policy](https://cloud.google.com/kubernetes-engine/docs/how-to/pod-security-policies#overview),

>        and [dataplane v2](https://cloud.google.com/kubernetes-engine/docs/concepts/dataplane-v2).

Reviewer 2: nit:
```suggestion
       or [dataplane v2](https://cloud.google.com/kubernetes-engine/docs/concepts/dataplane-v2).
```

Or maybe and/or. Not sure its needed, the prior part does say "when any of"

  values:
    cni:
      excludeNamespaces:
        - istio-system

>         - kube-system

Reviewer 2: nit: why not just make this default in manifests/? Not a blocker for this PR of course

### Race condition & mitigation

Istio CNI DaemonSet installs the CNI network plugin into every node.
However, a time gap exists between the DaemonSet gets scheduled onto a node, and the CNI plugin gets installed and ready to be used.
There is a chance that an application pod starts up during that time gap, and `kubelet` has no knowledge of the Istio CNI plugin.
The result is that the application pod comes up without Istio traffic redirection and bypasses Istio sidecar.

To mitigate the race between an application pod and the Istio CNI DaemonSet,
an `istio-validation` init container is added as part of the sidecar injection,
which detects if traffic redirection is set up correctly, and blocks pod starting up if not.
The CNI DaemonSet will detect and evict pod stuck at such state. The new pod starts up should have traffic redirection set up properly.
This mitigation is enabled by default and can be turned off by setting `values.cni.repair.enabled` to false.

### Traffic redirection parameters

To redirect traffic in the application pod's network namespace to/from the Istio proxy sidecar,
the Istio CNI plugin configures the namespace's iptables.

> You can adjust traffic redirection parameters using pod annotations, such as ports and IP ranges to be included or excluded from redirection.

Reviewer 2: nit:
```suggestion
You can adjust traffic redirection parameters using the same pod annotations as normal, such as ports and IP ranges to be included or excluded from redirection.
```

Maybe a better way to phrase it, but just saying that its not CNI-specific. Just that CNI also supports them like normal

  components:
    cni:
      enabled: true
      namespace: kube-system
  values:
    cni:
      cniBinDir: /home/kubernetes/bin
{{< /text >}}

* Red Hat OpenShift 4.2+

{{< text yaml >}}
apiVersion: install.istio.io/v1alpha1
kind: IstioOperator
spec:
  components:
    cni:
      enabled: true
      namespace: kube-system
  values:
    sidecarInjectorWebhook:
      injectedAnnotations:
        k8s.v1.cni.cncf.io/networks: istio-cni
    cni:
      cniBinDir: /var/lib/cni/bin
      cniConfDir: /etc/cni/multus/net.d
      cniConfFileName: istio-cni.conf
      chained: false
{{< /text >}}

## Operation details

### Upgrade

> When upgrading Istio with [in-place upgrade](/docs/setup/upgrade/in-place/),
> CNI component can be upgraded together with the control plane using one `IstioOperator` resource.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When upgrading Istio with [in-place upgrade](/docs/setup/upgrade/in-place/), the
CNI component can be upgraded together with the control plane using one `IstioOperator` resource.
```

> When upgrading Istio with [canary upgrade](/docs/setup/upgrade/canary/), since CNI component runs as a cluster singleton,
> it is recommended to operate and upgrade CNI separately from the revisioned control plane.
> The following `IstioOperator` can be used to operate CNI component independently.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When upgrading Istio with [canary upgrade](/docs/setup/upgrade/canary/), because the CNI component runs as a cluster singleton,
it is recommended to operate and upgrade the CNI component separately from the revisioned control plane.
The following `IstioOperator` can be used to operate the CNI component independently.
```

{{< text yaml >}}
apiVersion: install.istio.io/v1alpha1
kind: IstioOperator
spec:
  profile: empty # Do not include other components
  components:
    cni:
      enabled: true
  values:
    cni:
      excludeNamespaces:
        - istio-system
        - kube-system
{{< /text >}}

> When installing revisioned control plane with CNI component enabled,
> `values.istio_cni.enabled` needs to be set, so that sidecar injector does not `istio-init` `initContainer`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When installing revisioned control planes with the CNI component enabled,
`values.istio_cni.enabled` needs to be set, so that sidecar injector does not inject the `istio-init``initContainer`.
```

{{< text yaml >}}
apiVersion: install.istio.io/v1alpha1
kind: IstioOperator
spec:
  revision: REVISION_NAME
  ...
  values:
    istio_cni:
      enabled: true
  ...
{{< /text >}}

> CNI at version `1.x` is compatible with control plane at version `1.x-1`, `1.x`, and `1.x+1`,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The CNI plugin at version `1.x` is compatible with control plane at version `1.x-1`, `1.x`, and `1.x+1`,
```

which means CNI and control plane can be upgraded in any order, as long as their version difference is within one minor version.

### Race condition & mitigation

> Istio CNI DaemonSet installs the CNI network plugin into every node.
> However, a time gap exists between the DaemonSet gets scheduled onto a node, and the CNI plugin gets installed and ready to be used.
> There is a chance that an application pod starts up during that time gap, and `kubelet` has no knowledge of the Istio CNI plugin.
> The result is that the application pod comes up without Istio traffic redirection and bypasses Istio sidecar.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Istio CNI DaemonSet installs the CNI network plugin on every node.
However, a time gap exists between when the DaemonSet pod gets scheduled onto a node, and the CNI plugin is installed and ready to be used.
There is a chance that an application pod starts up during that time gap, and the `kubelet` has no knowledge of the Istio CNI plugin.
The result is that the application pod comes up without Istio traffic redirection and bypasses Istio sidecar.
```

To mitigate the race between an application pod and the Istio CNI DaemonSet,
an `istio-validation` init container is added as part of the sidecar injection,

> which detects if traffic redirection is set up correctly, and blocks pod starting up if not.
> The CNI DaemonSet will detect and evict pod stuck at such state. The new pod starts up should have traffic redirection set up properly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
which detects if traffic redirection is set up correctly, and blocks the pod starting up if not.
The CNI DaemonSet will detect and evict any pod stuck in such state. When the new pod starts up, it should have traffic redirection set up properly.
```

* Set the `traffic.sidecar.istio.io/excludeOutboundPorts` annotation to disable redirecting traffic to the
  specific outbound ports the init containers use.

{{< warning >}}
Please use the above settings with caution, since the IP/port exclusion annotations not only apply to init container traffic,

> but also application container traffic. i.e the application traffic sends to the configured IP/port will bypass Istio sidecar.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
but also application container traffic. i.e. application traffic sent to the configured IP/port will bypass the Istio sidecar.
```
